add text back (#17)
Lawrencium77/quant_blog: Fast and Accurate GPU Quantization for Transformers.md

As Transformer models increase in size, the computational cost of running inference also grows. Many organisations now face the challenge of deploying state-of-the-art models in a cost-effective way.

> One popular technique for doing so is **quantization** - by reducing the precision of network parameters and activations, quantization aims to **increase throughput** and **decrease memory footprint**. 

Reviewer: small nit: maybe we can say "numerical precision" here

> Of course, this is useless if quantizing to lower precision harms model accuracy. The first part of this blog introduces the quantization formulation, and explores techniques for minimising such degradations.

Reviewer: I wouldn't say useless, perhaps it would be better to say something like that there is a trade-off with accuracy if not done properly?

Reviewer 2: ? 
```suggestion
Of course, this is less useful if quantizing to lower precision harms model accuracy. The first part of this blog introduces the quantization formulation, and explores techniques for minimising such degradations.
```

> Reducing peak memory by quantizing from FP16 to INT8 is pretty much guaranteed. However, *achieving throughput improvements is more difficult*. The main challenge stems from overheads associated with the quantization/dequantization operations, which can mask performance gains from the blazingly fast INT8 [Tensor Core](https://www.nvidia.com/en-gb/data-center/tensor-cores/#:~:text=Tensor%20Cores%20enable%20mixed%2Dprecision,performance%20computing%20(HPC)%20tasks.) matrix multiplies. The second part of this blog explores the nuances around achieving peak performance on GPU.

Reviewer: nit: 
Reducing peak memory usage by quantizing from FP16 to INT8 is pretty much guaranteed

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Reducing peak memory usage by quantizing from FP16 to INT8 is pretty much guaranteed. However, *achieving throughput improvements is more difficult*. The main challenge stems from overheads associated with the quantization/dequantization operations, which can mask performance gains from the blazingly fast INT8 [Tensor Core](https://www.nvidia.com/en-gb/data-center/tensor-cores/#:~:text=Tensor%20Cores%20enable%20mixed%2Dprecision,performance%20computing%20(HPC)%20tasks.) matrix multiplies. The second part of this blog explores the nuances around achieving peak performance on GPU.
```

# Contents

* [Part I: Accurate Quantization](#part-i-accurate-quantization)
	* [Background Concepts](#background-concepts)
	* [Specifics of INT8 GEMMs](#specifics-of-int8-gemms)
	* [Quantization-Aware Training](#quantization-aware-training)
	* [Alternatives to QAT](#alternatives-to-qat)
* [Part II: Fast GPU Quantization in Practice](#part-ii-fast-gpu-quantization-in-practice)
	* [Available Solutions](#available-solutions)
	* [Memory Layouts](#memory-layouts)
	* [Operator Fusion Implementation](#operator-fusion-implementation)
	* [INT8 GEMM Benchmarking](#int8-gemm-benchmarking)
* [Part III: FP8 & The Future of 8-bit Quantization](#part-iii-fp8--the-future-of-8-bit-quantization)
	* [Data distribution alignment](#data-distribution-alignment)
	* [FP8 Training](#fp8-training)
	* [cuBLASLt API](#cublaslt-api)
* [References](#references)

# Part I: Accurate Quantization

## Background Concepts

> We'll start with a brief overview of quantization theory. This is not intended to be an exhaustive explanation; rather, it will serve as context for subsequent sections. For a more in-depth explanation, we recommend the blogs and papers given in the [References](https://chat.openai.com/?model=gpt-4#References) section [1-4].

Reviewer: is that the right link?

Reviewer 2: lol!

Author: Lool I've no idea how that got there! Have fixed

### The Quantization Equation

In principle, we can use any function to convert from a higher-precision to lower-precision representation. But a linear function is simplest and quickest [4]:

$$Q(x)=\textrm{Int}(x/S)-Z \tag{1}$$

Here, $Q$ and $x$ are the fixed-point output and floating-point input, while $S$ and $Z$ represent the scale factor and bias. $\textrm{Int}$ is a function that rounds to the nearest integer, clipping values outside of the representable range:

$$\textrm{Int}(x)=\textrm{Clip}(\textrm{Round}(x))\tag{2}$$

After applying our lower-precision operation we return the data to its original dynamic range with dequantization: 

> $$\tilde{x}=S Q(x) + Z\tag{3}$$

Reviewer: for some reason on Github this looks like a function SQ(x). Maybe Q(x) S could be better or Q(x) \cdot S?

This method is called **uniform quantization** since the quantized values are uniformly distributed over the input space. To calculate $S$ we select a **clipping range** $[\alpha, \beta]$ and then use:

$$S=\frac{\beta-\alpha}{2^b-1}\tag{4}$$

Here, $b$ is the number of bits in our quantization scheme. GPU based quantization schemes typically enforce $\alpha=-\beta$, which is known as **symmetric quantization**. This simplifies the (de)quantization functions by setting $Z=0$[^fn1], which helps reduce the cost of the transformation [4].

> It's important to note that the rounding function in Equation $(2)$ incurs a loss of information. In general, $\tilde{x}=SQ(x)\not = x$.  The value $\tilde{x}-x$ is called **quantization error**. 

Reviewer: $\tilde{x}=SQ(x)\not = x$ should that be again `S Q(X) + Z`?

Author: Yup

### Dynamic vs Static Quantization
A key question is how to determine the clipping range - determined by $\beta$. Too small, and we’ll excessively “truncate” outlier activations and weights. Too big, and we’ll lose precision.

> While model parameters can always be quantized offline, its activations can either be quantized **dynamically** (with the clipping range calculated for each activation during a forward pass) or **statically** (also offline). 

Reviewer: I would say "ahead of time" instead of offline

Dynamic quantization tends to be more accurate but requires additional computational overhead for online scalar calibration. As a result, **we only consider static quantization on GPU** because the scalar reduction (relative to an INT8 matmul) can be costly and limit performance gains.

### Calibration

Static quantization involves obtaining activation quantization parameters by passing several batches of data through the model to measure activation distribution. This process is called **calibration**. 

There are multiple methods to derive a clipping range from these activations, such as:

* Taking the min/max value from the calibration data
* Taking some percentile (e.g 99.99%) to determine the max value
* Minimising KL Divergence between the input and quantized distributions
* Minimising the Mean-Squared Error between input and quantized distributions

The following figure [5] shows a histogram of input activations for some layer in a neural network. The vertical lines represent the maximum clipping range, $\beta$, for various calibration schemes:

> ![](_attachments/Blank%20diagram%20(5).svg)

Reviewer: nit: the y-axis that is the count is slightly irrelevant it seems. Could normalise it to have it sum up to 1 i.e. the probability mass function of the distribution, also labelling of what the x-axis is might be useful

Author: Not sure what to do with this, since we didn't generate the figure ourselves. Might explain what the x-axis shows in the text...

<img src="_attachments/GEMM%20(1).svg" width="600" height="500">

The simplest approach is to use the same scale factor for all elements of $W$ (and likewise for $X$). This is known as **per-tensor** quantization.

It’s also common to share quantization parameters between some subgroups of each input matrix. A popular option is to assign a specific scale factor to each column of $W$, referred to as **per-channel (or per-column) quantization**. This is more accurate than per-tensor quantization; using a specific scale means the error incurred in quantizing each column is lower. 

## Specifics of INT8 GEMMs

The core element of a quantized neural network is INT8 matrix multiplication. Understanding its details is crucial for an efficient implementation. This section describes these details, and serves as context for [Part II](Part II: Fast GPU Quantization in Practice).

We identify two types of INT8 matmul, differentiated by their return type.

#### i8i32
Consider the following matrix multiplication:

$$Y=WX\tag{5}$$

> where $X\in \mathbb{R}^{N \times d}$, $W\in \mathbb{R}^{d \times d}$, $Y\in \mathbb{R}^{N \times d}$  are the input, weight, and output  tensors respectively. We omit a bias for simplicity. Consider the case where all tensors are **Floating Point**, but the matrix multiply runs in INT8. An INT8 in INT32 out (i8i32) matrix multiplication is implemented as follows:

Reviewer: can you add that input and output are fp16 in this example?

![](_attachments/Mode%201%20GEMM%20(3)%201.svg)

The arrows indicate a data transfer with dtype given by their colour. The square boxes indicate operations, with dtype of the return variable also given by their colour.

There are several points to note:

* The input $X$ first passes through a quantization operation, labelled Q. This performs the operation described in Equation $(1)$.
* Our weights $W$ can be quantized offline. 

> * The accumulated output of the Matmul has **INT32** dtype. This is because multiplication of two signed INT8 values can be represented in INT16. Since a matmul involves the addition of several INT16 values, the accumulator must have dtype INT32 to prevent overflow.

Reviewer: isn't it still possible to get an overflow by adding up many int16 numbers (> 65536 to be precise)? I guess it's very unlikely but could happen?

Author: Yep. Have added a footnote

![](_attachments/Mode%201%20GEMM%20(4).svg)

![](_attachments/Mode%202%20GEMM%20(1).svg)

In both cases, the Q node can sometimes be fused with a preceding operation, in this case a layernorm. 
In i8i32, we see the DQ is fused with the matrix multiply itself. This ensures the dtype of the tensor that's transferred between SRAM and DRAM is FP16 instead of INT32.
In i8i8, we see the RQ is fused with the matmul. This ensures an INT8 return type. The DQ can sometimes be fused with following ops (for example, a residual add). ^091c98

For more detail, see the section on [Operator Fusion Implementation](#operator-fusion-implementation).

## Quantization-Aware Training
So far, we have explored **Post-Training Quantization**, in which model weights are converted to INT8 after training. The degree of accuracy degradation depends upon the effectiveness of our calibration methods.

Another approach, **Quantization-Aware Training**, accounts for the impact of quantization during the training process. It can be viewed as a fine-tuning stage, adjusting model parameters to better adapt to quantization effects, thereby minimizing accuracy degradation.

> Specifically, we insert nodes into the computational graph that do quantization, followed immediately by dequantization. These are labeled "QDQ" in the following diagram:

Reviewer: Does it make sense to explain in a few words what the QDQ nodes are for? Am I right in understanding that they kind-of simulate the quantisation error?

Author: Yes, the _exactly_ mimic quantization, in the sense that it doesn't matter whether we put the DQ node before or after the GEMM. Have added a sentence to explain.

![](_attachments/QAT.svg)

We insert QDQ nodes for every quantized matmul in our network. Note that the above diagram represents i8i32 quantization. To prepare for i8i8, we insert an additional QDQ node after the matrix multiply to emulate the requantization step.

The process is then relatively straightforward: we calibrate each QDQ node, and subsequently finetune the model parameters. However, there is a complication related to backpropagation: the quantization operation is non-differentiable. In practice, we simply ignore this issue by treating  the derivative of each QDQ node as the identity function. This assumption is referred to as the **Straight-Through Estimator**.[^fn2]

## Alternatives to QAT

For situations where QAT is insufficient or undesirable, other approaches can be considered.

> Recent research paper LLM.int8() [7] highlighted the existence of extreme outliers in large language models, which severely degrades accuracy when quantizing to INT8. Their solution was to decompose each matrix multiplication into 8-bit and 16-bit parts, where the wider range FP16 was used to preserve outliers.

Reviewer: where are those outliers? in the activations?

Author: @david-macleod my understanding was that it's in both the weights and activations. Lmk if you disagree

Reviewer 2: Think its activations

>  it is critical to understand
the emergence of extreme outliers in the feature
dimensions of the hidden states during inference

A consequence of this is that SmoothQuant can only be applied (without performance overhead) to matrix multiplications that follow an operation which can accommodate a smoothing factor into its parameters, such as LayerNorm. The diagram below indicates the relevant matrix multiplies in a standard transformer block:

![](_attachments/Blank%20diagram%20(4).svg)

# Part II: Fast GPU Quantization in Practice

In order to run INT8 GEMMs efficiently on CUDA GPUs we must execute the operation against INT8 Tensor Cores. These were first introduced with the Turing architecture (compute capability 7.0+). INT4 and INT1 Tensor Cores also exist but have been deprecated in future architectures (see the figure below, taken from [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ampere_(microarchitecture))). We therefore focus on INT8 quantization.

![](_attachments/Pasted%20image%2020230416203418.png)

> Executing against Tensor Cores can be achieved by running the `mma.sync.aligned.m8n32k16.row.col.s32.s8.s8.s32` [PTX](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parallel_Thread_Execution) instruction, or calling `wmma::mma_sync` at the CUDA level. However, both approaches require careful management of data movement and layouts to maximize Tensor Core throughput. 

Reviewer: > mma.sync.aligned.m8n32k16.row.col.s32.s8.s8.s32

that's my favourite instruction name 😆

Thankfully, these lower level details are abstracted away by the cuBLASLt  `cublasLtMatmul`  and CUTLASS `device::Gemm` APIs, both of which support IMMA (integer matrix multiply accumulate).

## Available Solutions

> While integration with these APIs is currently not supported natively in PyTorch, there are other libraries available such as [**torch-int**](https://github.com/Guangxuan-Xiao/torch-int) (SmoothQuant [7]) and [**bitsandbytes**](https://github.com/TimDettmers/bitsandbytes) (LLM.int8()) [9] which expose Python bindings to the underlying cuBLASLt/CUTLASS calls. Microsoft's **ZeroQuant** [10] also leverage [CUTLASS](https://github.com/NVIDIA/cutlass), but wrappers for their INT8 kernels are not open source.

Reviewer: which APIs?

Reviewer 2: The ones mentioned in the prev section - need to make this more explicit

Author: imo this is pretty clear already - lmk if you think there's still a need to change

Reviewer 2: Its the very last thing in the prev section, but there is a header separating. Hard to have an opinion this as I'm too close it

![](_attachments/Pasted%20image%2020230329113458.png)

While `COL32` is the most performant layout, it comes with an associated cost of layout conversion. This may cancel out any gains from the reduced precision matmul. Therefore, we must decide to either:

1. Persist the data in the required format (à la [Faster Transformer](#Available%20Solutions)).
2. Hide the cost via kernel fusion. 

The latter approach is similar to how quantization/dequantization overhead is typically hidden, which is discussed next.

## Operator Fusion Implementation
As described in the [Quantization Operation Overheads](#quantization-operation-overheads) section, kernel fusion is essential to developing a quantized model with superior throughput to FP16. These can be implemented using OpenAI's [Triton Language](https://github.com/openai/triton)[11]. This section provides a short example.

Consider the code below. It demonstrates a modified Layernorm kernel, based upon that given in the [Triton documentation](https://triton-lang.org/master/getting-started/tutorials/05-layer-norm.html). Besides performing the layernorm operation, it also:

* Fuses a quantization op, `_quant()`, and

> * Converts data layout from row-major to COL32 (see `cols_out`).

Reviewer: this is super cool. I wish I knew better how to read Triton code 😆

	rstd = 1 / tl.sqrt(var + eps)

	# Layernorm: Multiply by weight, and add bias
	cols = off + tl.arange(0, BLOCK_SIZE)
	mask = cols < N
	weight = tl.load(Weight + cols, mask=mask)
	bias = tl.load(Bias + cols, mask=mask)
	a = tl.load(Input + cols, mask=mask, other=0.0, eviction_policy="evict_first").to(tl.float32)
	a_hat = (a - mean) * rstd
	y = a_hat * weight + bias

	# Quantize
	pos_clamps = tl.zeros([BLOCK_SIZE], dtype=tl.float32) + 127
	neg_clamps = tl.zeros([BLOCK_SIZE], dtype=tl.float32) - 127
	out = _quant(y, quant_scale, pos_clamps, neg_clamps) # _quant defined elsewhere

	# Pointer arithmetic for Row-major --> COL32	
	cols_out = cols // stride_out * (stride_out * M) + (cols % stride_out)
	
	# Store output
	tl.store(Output + cols_out, out, mask=mask)
```

## INT8 GEMM Benchmarking

We now examine peformance numbers for various flavours of INT8 GEMM. For these benchmarks, we wrap the C++ APIs for cuBLASLt and CUTLASS as PyTorch extensions.

Benchmarks were run on a T4 GPU with input tensors of shape `[2048, 1920]` and `[1920, 1920]`. While mileage may vary for different input shapes, the following conclusions were found to be consistent over a variety of shapes/sizes.

> For a detailed guide to timing CUDA kernels with PyTorch, see this [previous blog](https://www.speechmatics.com/company/articles-and-news/timing-operations-in-pytorch). 

Reviewer: nice self citation!
